'\" t
.TH samtools-cram-size 1 "15 April 2024" "samtools-1.20" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools cram-size \- list a break down of data types in a CRAM file
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Genome Research Ltd.
.\"
.\" Author: James Bonfield <jkb@sanger.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX
.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools cram-size
.RB [ -ve ]
.RB [ -o
.IR file ]
.I in.bam

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Produces a summary of CRAM block Content ID numbers and their
associated Data Series stored within them.  Optionally a more detailed
breakdown of how each data series is encoded per container may also be
listed using the \fB-e\fR or \fB--encodings\fR option.

CRAM permits mixing multiple Data Series into a single block.  In this
case it is not possible to tell the relative proportion that the Data
Series consume within that block.  CRAM also permits different
encodings and block Content ID assignment per container, although this
would be highly unusual.  Htslib will always assign the same Data
Series to a block with a consistent Content ID, although the CRAM
Encoding may change.

Each CRAM block has a compression method.  These may not be consistent
between successive blocks with the same Content ID.  Htslib learns
which compression methods work, so a single Content ID may have
multiple compression methods associated with it.  The methods utilised
are listed per line with a single character code, although the size
breakdown per method and a more verbose description can be shown using
the \fB-v\fR option.  The compression codecs used in CRAM may have a
variety of parameters, such as compression levels, inbuilt
transformations, and choices of entropy encoding.  An attempt is made
to distinguish between these different method parameterisations.

The compression methods and their short and long (verbose) name are below:

.TS
centre;
l l l
l l l .
Short	Long	Description
_
g	gzip	Gzip
\&_	gzip-min	Gzip -1
G	gzip-max	Gzip -9
b	bzip2	Bzip2
b	bzip2-1 to bzip2-8	Explicit bzip2 compression levels
B	bzip2-9	Bzip2 -9
l	lzma	LZMA
r	r4x8-o0	rANS 4x8 Order-0
R	r4x8-o1	rANS 4x8 Order-1
0	r4x16-o0	rANS 4x16 Order-0
0	r4x16-o0R	rANS 4x16 Order-0 with RLE
0	r4x16-o0P	rANS 4x16 Order-0 with PACK
0	r4x16-o0PR	rANS 4x16 Order-0 with PACK and RLE
1	r4x16-o1	rANS 4x16 Order-1
1	r4x16-o1R	rANS 4x16 Order-1 with RLE
1	r4x16-o1P	rANS 4x16 Order-1 with PACK
1	r4x16-o1PR	rANS 4x16 Order-1 with PACK and RLE
4	r32x16-o0	rANS 32x16 Order-0
4	r32x16-o0R	rANS 32x16 Order-0 with RLE
4	r32x16-o0P	rANS 32x16 Order-0 with PACK
4	r32x16-o0PR	rANS 32x16 Order-0 with PACK and RLE
5	r32x16-o1	rANS 32x16 Order-1
5	r32x16-o1R	rANS 32x16 Order-1 with RLE
5	r32x16-o1P	rANS 32x16 Order-1 with PACK
5	r32x16-o1PR	rANS 32x16 Order-1 with PACK and RLE
8	rNx16-xo0	rANS Nx16 STRIPED mode
2	rNx16-cat	rANS Nx16 CAT mode
a	arith-o0	Arithmetic coding Order-0
a	arith-o0R	Arithmetic coding Order-0 with RLE
a	arith-o0P	Arithmetic coding Order-0 with PACK
a	arith-o0PR	Arithmetic coding Order-0 with PACK and RLE
A	arith-o1	Arithmetic coding Order-1
A	arith-o1R	Arithmetic coding Order-1 with RLE
A	arith-o1P	Arithmetic coding Order-1 with PACK
A	arith-o1PR	Arithmetic coding Order-1 with PACK and RLE
a	arith-xo0	Arithmetic coding STRIPED mode
a	arith-cat	Arithmetic coding CAT mode
f	fqzcomp	FQZComp quality codec
n	tok3-rans	Name tokeniser with rANS encoding
n	tok3-arith	Name tokeniser with Arithmetic encoding
.TE


.SH OPTIONS

.TP 10
.BI "-o " FILE
Output size information to \fIFILE\fR.

.TP
.B -v
Verbose mode.  This shows one line per combination of Content ID and
compression method.

.TP
.B -e, --encodings
CRAM uses an Encoding, which describes how the data is serialised into
a data block.  This is distinct from the CRAM compression method,
which is then applied to the block post-encoding.  The encoding
methods are stored per CRAM Container.

This option list CRAM record encoding map and tag encoding map.  This
shows the data series, the associated CRAM encoding method, such as
HUFFMAN, BETA or EXTERNAL, and any parameters associated with that
encoding.  The output may be large as this is information per
container rather than a single set of summary statistics at the end of
processing.

.SH EXAMPLES
.IP -
The basic summary of block Content ID sizes for a CRAM file:
.EX 2
$ samtools cram-size in.cram
#   Content_ID  Uncomp.size    Comp.size   Ratio Method  Data_series
BLOCK     CORE            0            0 100.00% .      
BLOCK       11    394734019     51023626  12.93% g       RN
BLOCK       12   1504781763     99158495   6.59% R       QS
BLOCK       13       330065        84195  25.51% _r.g    IN
BLOCK       14     26625602      6803930  25.55% Rrg     SC
\&...
.EE

.IP -
Show the same file above with verbose mode.  Here we see the distinct
compression methods which have been used per block Content ID.
.EX 2
$ samtools cram-size -v in.cram
#   Content_ID  Uncomp.size    Comp.size   Ratio Method      Data_series
BLOCK     CORE            0            0 100.00% raw        
BLOCK       11    394734019     51023626  12.93% gzip        RN
BLOCK       12   1504781763     99158495   6.59% r4x8-o1     QS
BLOCK       13       275033        64343  23.39% gzip-min    IN
BLOCK       13        43327        15412  35.57% r4x8-o0     IN
BLOCK       13         2452         2452 100.00% raw         IN
BLOCK       13         9253         1988  21.49% gzip        IN
BLOCK       14     23106404      5903351  25.55% r4x8-o1     SC
BLOCK       14      1951616       513722  26.32% r4x8-o0     SC
BLOCK       14      1567582       386857  24.68% gzip        SC
\&...
.EE

.IP -
List encoding methods per CRAM Data Series.  The two letter series are
the standard CRAM Data Series and the three letter ones are the
optional auxiliary tags with the tag name and type combined.

.EX 2
$ samtools cram-size -e in.cram
Container encodings
    RN      BYTE_ARRAY_STOP(stop=0,id=11)
    QS      EXTERNAL(id=12)
    IN      BYTE_ARRAY_STOP(stop=0,id=13)
    SC      BYTE_ARRAY_STOP(stop=0,id=14)
    BB      BYTE_ARRAY_LEN(len_codec={EXTERNAL(id=42)}, \\
                           val_codec={EXTERNAL(id=37)}
    ...
    XAZ     BYTE_ARRAY_STOP(stop=9,id=5783898)
    MDZ     BYTE_ARRAY_STOP(stop=9,id=5063770)
    ASC     BYTE_ARRAY_LEN(len_codec={HUFFMAN(codes={1},lengths={0})}, \\
                           val_codec={EXTERNAL(id=4281155)}
    ...
.EE

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by James Bonfield from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
