'\" t
.TH samtools-ampliconclip 1 "15 April 2024" "samtools-1.20" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools ampliconclip \- clip reads using a BED file
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2021 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Andrew Whitwham <aw7@sanger.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools ampliconclip
.RB [ -o
.IR out.file ]
.RB [ -f
.IR stat.file ]
.RB [ --soft-clip ]
.RB [ --hard-clip ]
.RB [ --both-ends ]
.RB [ --strand ]
.RB [ --clipped ]
.RB [ --fail ]
.RB [ --filter-len
.IR INT ]
.RB [ --fail-len
.IR INT ]
.RB [ --unmap-len
.IR INT ]
.RB [ --no-excluded ]
.RB [ --rejects-file
.IR rejects.file ]
.RB [ --original ]
.RB [ --keep-tag ]
.RB [ --tolerance ]
.RB [ --no-PG ]
.RB [ -u ]
.B -b
.I bed.file in.file

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Clips the ends of read alignments if they intersect with regions defined in a
BED file.  While this tool was originally written for clipping read alignment
positions which correspond to amplicon primer locations it can also be used in
other contexts.

BED file entries used are chrom, chromStart, chromEnd and, optionally, strand.
Standard BED file format must be used, so if strand is needed then the name and
score fields must also be present (even though ampliconclip does not read them). 
There is a default tolerance of 5 bases when matching chromStart and chromEnd
to alignments.

By default the reads are soft clipped and clip is only done from the 5' end.

Some things to be aware of.  While ordering is not significant, adjustments to
the left most mapping position (\fIPOS\fR) will mean that coordinate sorted
files will need resorting.  In such cases the sorting order in the header is set
to unknown. Clipping of reads results in template length (\fITLEN\fR) being
incorrect. This can be corrected by \fBsamtools fixmates\fR.  Any \fIMD\fR and
\fINM\fR aux tags will also be incorrect, which can be fixed by \fBsamtools
calmd\fR.  By default \fIMD\fR and \fINM\fR tags are removed though if the
output is in CRAM format these tags will be automatically regenerated.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 11
.BI "-b " FILE
BED file of regions (e.g. amplicon primers) to be removed.
.TP
.BI "-o " FILE
Output file name (defaults to stdout).
.TP
.BI "-f " FILE
File to write stats to (defaults to stderr).
.TP
.B -u
Output uncompressed SAM, BAM or CRAM.
.TP
.B --soft-clip
Soft clip reads (default).
.TP
.B --hard-clip
Hard clip reads.
.TP
.B --both-ends
Clip at both the 5' and the 3' ends where regions match.  When using this option
the \fB--strand\fR option is ignored.
.TP
.B --strand
Use strand entry from the BED file to clip on the matching forward or reverse
alignment. 
.TP
.B --clipped
Only output clipped reads.  Filter all others.
.TP
.B --fail
Mark unclipped reads as QC fail.
.TP
.BI "--filter-len " INT
Filter out reads of INT size or shorter.  In this case soft clips are not counted
toward read length.  An INT of 0 will filter out reads with no matching bases.
.TP
.BI "--fail-len " INT
As \fB--filter-len\fR but mark as QC fail rather then filter out.
.TP
.BI "--unmap-len " INT
As \fB--filter-len\fR but mark as unmapped. Default is 0 (no matching reads).  -1 will disable.
.TP
.B --no-excluded
Filter out any reads that are marked as QCFAIL or are unmapped.  This works on
the state of the reads before clipping takes place.
.TP
.BI "--rejects-file " FILE
Write any filtered reads out to a file.
.TP
.BI "--primer-counts " FILE
File to write with read counts per bed entry (bedgraph format).
.TP
.B --original
Add an OA tag with the original data for clipped files.
.TP
.B --keep-tag
In clipped reads, keep the possibly invalid NM and MD tags.  By default these tags are deleted.  
.TP
.BI "--tolerance " INT
The amount of latitude given in matching regions to alignments.  Default 5 bases.
.TP
.B --no-PG
Do not at a PG line to the header.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Andrew Whitwham and Rob Davies, both from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-sort (1),
.IR samtools-fixmate (1),
.IR samtools-calmd (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
