'\" t
.TH samtools-head 1 "15 April 2024" "samtools-1.20" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools head \- view SAM/BAM/CRAM file headers
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 University of Glasgow.
.\"
.\" Author: John Marshall <jmarshall@hey.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B samtools head
.RB [ -h
.IR INT ]
.RB [ -n
.IR INT ]
.RI [ FILE ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
By default, prints all headers from the specified input file to standard output
in SAM format.
The input alignment file may be in SAM, BAM, or CRAM format; if no \fIFILE\fR
is specified, standard input will be read.
With appropriate options, only some of the headers and/or additionally some
of the alignment records will be printed.
.P
The \fBsamtools head\fR command outputs SAM headers exactly as they appear
in the input file; in particular, it never adds an @PG header itself.
(Other \fBsamtools\fR commands add such @PG headers to facilitate provenance
tracking in analysis pipelines, but because \fBsamtools head\fR never outputs
more than a handful of alignment records it is unsuitable for use in such
contexts anyway.)

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 4n
.BI "-h, --headers " INT
Display only the first \fIINT\fR header lines.
By default, all header lines are displayed.
.TP
.BI "-n, --records " INT
Also display the first \fIINT\fR alignment records.
By default, no alignment records are displayed.

.SH AUTHOR
Written by John Marshall from the University of Glasgow.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-view (1)
