'\" t
.TH samtools-consensus 1 "15 April 2024" "samtools-1.20" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools consensus \- produces a consensus FASTA/FASTQ/PILEUP
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021-2024 Genome Research Ltd.
.\"
.\" Author: James Bonfield <jkb@sanger.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools consensus
.RB [ -saAMq ]
.RB [ -r
.IR region ]
.RB [ -f
.IR format ]
.RB [ -l
.IR line-len ]
.RB [ -d
.IR min-depth ]
.RB [ -C
.IR cutoff ]
.RB [ -c
.IR call-fract ]
.RB [ -H
.IR het-fract ]
.I in.bam

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Generate consensus from a SAM, BAM or CRAM file based on the contents
of the alignment records.  The consensus is written either as FASTA, 
FASTQ, or a pileup oriented format.  This is selected using the
.BI "-f " FORMAT
option.

The default output for FASTA and FASTQ formats include one base per
non-gap consensus.  Hence insertions with respect to the aligned
reference will be included and deletions removed.  This behaviour can
be controlled with the 
.B --show-ins
and
.B --show-del
options.  This could be used to compute a new reference from sequences
assemblies to realign against.

The pileup-style format strictly adheres to one row per consensus
location, differing from the one row per reference based used in the
related "samtools mpileup" command.  This means the base quality
values for inserted columns are reported.  The base quality value of
gaps (either within an insertion or otherwise) are determined as the
average of the surrounding non-gap bases.  The columns shown are the
reference name, position, nth base at that position (zero if not an
insertion), consensus call, consensus confidence, sequences and
quality values.

Two consensus calling algorithms are offered.  The default computes a
heterozygous consensus in a Bayesian manner, derived from the "Gap5"
consensus algorithm.  Quality values are also tweaked to take into
account other nearby low quality values.  This can also be disabled,
using the \fB--no-adj-qual\fR option.

This method also utilises the mapping qualities, unless the
\fB--no-use-MQ\fR option is used.  Mapping qualities are also
auto-scaled to take into account the local reference variation by
processing the MD:Z tag, unless \fB--no-adj-MQ\fR is used.  Mapping
qualities can be capped between a minimum (\fB--low-MQ\fR) and maximum
(\fB--high-MQ\fR), although the defaults are liberal and trust the
data to be true.  Finally an overall scale on the resulting mapping
quality can be supplied (\fB--scale-MQ\fR, defaulting to 1.0).  This
has the effect of favouring more calls with a higher false positive
rate (values greater than 1.0) or being more cautious with higher
false negative rates and lower false positive (values less than 1.0).

The second method is a simple frequency counting algorithm, summing
either +1 for each base type or
.RI + qual
if the
.B --use-qual
option is specified.  This is enabled with the \fB--mode simple\fR option.

The summed share of a specific base type
is then compared against the total possible and if this is above the
.BI "--call-fract " fraction
parameter then the most likely base type is called, or "N" otherwise (or
absent if it is a gap).  The
.B --ambig
option permits generation of ambiguity codes instead of "N", provided
the minimum fraction of the second most common base type to the most
common is above the
.BI "--het-fract " fraction .

.SH OPTIONS

General options that apply to both algorithms:

.TP 10
.BI "-r " REG ", --region " REG
Limit the query to region
.IR REG .
This requires an index.
.TP
.BI "-f " FMT ", --format " FMT
Produce format
.IR FMT ,
with "fastq", "fasta" and "pileup" as permitted options.
.TP
.BI "-l " N ", --line-len " N
Sets the maximum line length of line-wrapped fasta and fastq formats to
.IR N .
.TP
.BI "-o " FILE ", --output " FILE
Output consensus to FILE instead of stdout.
.TP
.BI "-m " STR ", --mode " STR
Select the consensus algorithm.  Valid modes are "simple" frequency
counting and the "bayesian" (Gap5) methods, with Bayesian being the
default.  (Note case does not matter, so "Bayesian" is accepted too.)
There are a variety of bayesian methods.  Straight "bayesian" is the
best set suitable for the other parameters selected.  The choice of
internal parameters may change depending on the "--P-indel" score.
This method distinguishes between substitution and indel error rates.
The old Samtools consensus in version 1.16 did not distinguish types
of errors, but for compatibility the "bayesian_116" mode may be
selected to replicate this.
.TP
.B -a
Outputs all bases, from start to end of reference, even when the
aligned data does not extend to the ends.  This is most useful for
construction of a full length reference sequence.

.TP
.B -a -a, -aa
Output absolutely all positions, including references with no data
aligned against them.

.TP
\fB--rf\fR, \fB--incl-flags\fR \fISTR\fR|\fIINT\fR
Only include reads with at least one FLAG bit set.  Defaults to zero,
which filters no reads.

.TP
\fB--ff\fR, \fB--excl-flags\fR \fISTR\fR|\fIINT\fR
Exclude reads with any FLAG bit set.  Defaults to
"UNMAP,SECONDARY,QCFAIL,DUP".

.TP
.BI "--min-MQ " INT
Filters out reads with a mapping quality below \fIINT\fR.  This
defaults to zero.

.TP
.BI "--min-BQ " INT
Filters out bases with a base quality below \fIINT\fR.  This defaults
to zero.

.TP
.BI --show-del " yes" / "no"
Whether to show deletions as "*" (yes) or to omit from the output
(no).  Defaults to no.

.TP
.BI --show-ins " yes" / "no"
Whether to show insertions in the consensus.  Defaults to yes.

.TP
.BR --mark-ins
Insertions, when shown, are normally recorded in the consensus with
plain 7-bit ASCII (ACGT, or acgt if heterozygous).  However this makes
it impossible to identify the mapping between consensus coordinates
and the original reference coordinates.  If fasta output is selected
then the option adds an underscore before every inserted base, plus a
corresponding character in the quality for fastq format.  When used in
conjunction with \fB-a --show-del yes\fR, this permits an easy
derivation of the consensus to reference coordinate mapping.

.TP
.BR -A ", " --ambig
Enables IUPAC ambiguity codes in the consensus output.  Without this
the output will be limited to A, C, G, T, N and *.

.TP
.BI "-d " D ", --min-depth " D
The minimum depth required to make a call.  Defaults to 1.  Failing
this depth check will produce consensus "N", or absent if it is an
insertion.  Note this check is performed after filtering by flags
and mapping/base quality.

.TP 0
The following options apply only to the simple consensus mode:

.TP 10
.BR "-q" ", " --use-qual
For the simple consensus algorithm, this enables use of base quality
values.  Instead of summing 1 per base called, it sums the base
quality instead.  These sums are also used in the
.B --call-fract
and
.B --het-fract
parameters too.  Quality values are always used for the "Gap5"
consensus method and this option has no affect.
Note currently  quality values only affect SNPs and not inserted
sequences, which still get scores with a fixed +1 per base type occurrence.

.TP
.BI "-H " H ", --het-fract " H
For consensus columns containing multiple base types, if the second
most frequent type is at least
.I H
fraction of the most common type then a heterozygous base type will be
reported in the consensus.  Otherwise the most common base is used,
provided it meets the
.I --call-fract
parameter (otherwise "N").  The fractions computed may be modified by
the use of quality values if the
.B -q
option is enabled.
Note although IUPAC has ambiguity codes for A,C,G,T vs any other
A,C,G,T it does not have codes for A,C,G,T vs gap (such as in a
heterozygous deletion).  Given the lack of any official code, we
use lower-case letter to symbolise a half-present base type.

.TP
.BI "-c " C ", --call-fract " C
Only used for the simple consensus algorithm.  Require at least
.I C
fraction of bases agreeing with the most likely consensus call to emit
that base type.  This defaults to 0.75.  Failing this check will
output "N".


.TP 0
The following options apply only to Bayesian consensus mode enabled
(default on).

.TP 10
.BI "-C " C ", --cutoff " C
Only used for the Gap5 consensus mode, which produces a Phred style
score for the final consensus quality.  If this is below
.I C
then the consensus is called as "N".

.TP
.BR "--use-MQ" ", " "--no-use-MQ"
Enable or disable the use of mapping qualities.  Defaults to on.

.TP
.BR "--adj-MQ" ", " "--no-adj-MQ"
If mapping qualities are used, this controls whether they are scaled
by the local number of mismatches to the reference.  The reference is
unknown by this tool, so this data is obtained from the MD:Z auxiliary
tag (or ignored if not present).  Defaults to on.

.TP
.BI "--NM-halo " INT
Specifies the distance either side of the base call being considered
for computing the number of local mismatches.

.TP
\fB--low-MQ \fIMIN\fR, \fB--high-MQ \fIMAX\fR
Specifies a minimum and maximum value of the mapping quality.  These
are not filters and instead simply put upper and lower caps on the
values.  The defaults are 0 and 60.

.TP
.BI "--scale-MQ " FLOAT
This is a general multiplicative  mapping quality scaling factor.  The
effect is to globally raise or lower the quality values used in the
consensus algorithm.  Defaults to 1.0, which leaves the values unchanged.

.TP
.BI "--P-het " FLOAT
Controls the likelihood of any position being a heterozygous site.
This is used in the priors for the Bayesian calculations, and has
little difference on deep data.  Defaults to 1e-3.  Smaller numbers
makes the algorithm more likely to call a pure base type.  Note the
algorithm will always compute the probability of the base being
homozygous vs heterozygous, irrespective of whether the output is
reported as ambiguous (it will be "N" if deemed to be heterozygous
without \fB--ambig\fR mode enabled).

.TP
.BI "--P-indel " FLOAT
Controls the likelihood of small indels.  This is used in the priors
for the Bayesian calculations, and has little difference on deep data.
Defaults to 2e-4.

.TP
.BI "--het-scale " FLOAT
This is a multiplicative correction applied per base quality before
adding to the heterozygous hypotheses.  Reducing it means fewer
heterozygous calls are made.  This oftens leads a significant
reduction in false positive het calls, for some increase in false
negatives (mislabelling real heterozygous sites as homozygous).  It is
usually beneficial to reduce this on instruments where a significant
proportion of bases may be aligned in the wrong column due to
insertions and deletions leading to alignment errors and reference
bias.  It can be considered as a het sensitivity tuning parameter.
Defaults to 1.0 (nop).

.TP
.BR -p ", " --homopoly-fix
Some technologies that call runs of the same base type together always
put the lowest quality calls at one end.  This can cause problems when
reverse complementing and comparing alignments with indels.  This
option averages the qualities at both ends to avoid orientation
biases.  Recommended for old 454 or PacBio HiFi data sets.

.TP
.BI "--homopoly-score " FLOAT
The \fB-p\fR option also reduces confidence values within homopolymers
due to an additional likelihood of sequence specific errors.  The
quality values are multiplied by \fIFLOAT\fR.  This defaults to 0.5,
but is not used if \fB-p\fR was not specified.  Adjusting this score
also automatically enables \fB-p\fR.

.TP
\fB-t\fR, \fB--qual-calibration\fR \fIFILE\fR
Loads a quality calibration table from \fIFILE\fR.  The format of
this is a series of lines with the following fields, each starting with the
literal text "QUAL":

    \fBQUAL\fR \fIvalue\fR \fIsubstitution\fR \fIundercall\fR \fIovercall\fR

Lines starting with a "#" are ignored.  Each line maps a recorded
quality value to the Phred equivalent score for substitution,
undercall and overcall errors.  Quality \fIvalue\fRs are expected to
be sorted in increasing numerical order, but may skip values.  This
allows the consensus algorithm to know the most likely cause of an
error, and whether the instrument is more likely to have indel errors
(more common in some long read technologies) or substitution errors
(more common in clocked short-read instruments).

Some pre-defined calibration tables are built in.  These are specified
with a fake filename starting with a colon.  See the \fB-X\fR option
for more details.

Note due to the additional heuristics applied by the consensus
algorithm, these recalibration tables are not a true reflection of the
instrument error rates and are a work in progress.

.TP
\fB-X\fR, \fB--config \fISTR\fR
Specifies predefined sets of configuration parameters.  Acceptable
values for \fISTR\fR are defined below, along with the list of
parameters they are equivalent to.
.RS
.TP 10
.B hiseq
--qual-calibration :hiseq
.TP
.B hifi
--qual-calibration :hifi
--homopoly-fix 0.3 --low-MQ 5 --scale-MQ 1.5 --het-scale 0.37
.TP
.B r10.4_sup
--qual-calibration :r10.4_sup
--homopoly-fix 0.3 --low-MQ 5 --scale-MQ 1.5 --het-scale 0.37
.TP
.B r10.4_dup
--qual-calibration :r10.4_dup
--homopoly-fix 0.3 --low-MQ 5 --scale-MQ 1.5 --het-scale 0.37
.TP
.B ultima
--qual-calibration :ultima
--homopoly-fix 0.3 --low-MQ 10 --scale-MQ 2 --het-scale 0.37
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP -
Create a modified FASTA reference that has a 1:1 coordinate correspondence with the original reference used in alignment.
.EX 2
samtools consensus -a --show-ins no in.bam -o ref.fa
.EE

.IP -
Create a FASTQ file for the contigs with aligned data, including insertions.
.EX 2
samtools consensus -f fastq in.bam -o cons.fq
.EE

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by James Bonfield from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-mpileup (1),
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
