'\" t
.TH samtools-stats 1 "6 December 2019" "samtools-1.10" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools stats \- produces comprehensive statistics from alignment file
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2018 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools stats
.RI [ options ]
.IR in.sam | in.bam | in.cram
.RI [ region ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
samtools stats collects statistics from BAM files and outputs in a text format.
The output can be visualized graphically using plot-bamstats.

A summary of output sections is listed below, followed by more
detailed descriptions.

.TS
lb l .
CHK     Checksum
SN      Summary numbers
FFQ     First fragment qualities
LFQ     Last fragment qualities
GCF     GC content of first fragments
GCL     GC content of last fragments
GCC     ACGT content per cycle
FBC     ACGT content per cycle for first fragments only
FTC     ACGT raw counters for first fragments
LBC     ACGT content per cycle for last fragments only
LTC     ACGT raw counters for last fragments
BCC     ACGT content per cycle for BC barcode
CRC     ACGT content per cycle for CR barcode
OXC     ACGT content per cycle for OX barcode
RXC     ACGT content per cycle for RX barcode
QTQ     Quality distribution for BC barcode
CYQ     Quality distribution for CR barcode
BZQ     Quality distribution for OX barcode
QXQ     Quality distribution for RX barcode
IS      Insert sizes
RL      Read lengths
FRL     Read lengths for first fragments only
LRL     Read lengths for last fragments only
ID      Indel size distribution
IC      Indels per cycle
COV     Coverage (depth) distribution
GCD     GC-depth
.TE

Not all sections will be reported as some depend on the data being
coordinate sorted while others are only present when specific barcode
tags are in use.

Some of the statistics are collected for \*(lqfirst\*(rq or \*(lqlast\*(rq
fragments.
Records are put into these categories using the PAIRED (0x1), READ1 (0x40)
and READ2 (0x80) flag bits, as follows:

.IP \(bu 4
Unpaired reads (i.e. PAIRED is not set) are all \*(lqfirst\*(rq fragments.
For these records, the READ1 and READ2 flags are ignored.
.IP \(bu 4
Reads where PAIRED and READ1 are set, and READ2 is not set are \*(lqfirst\*(rq
fragments.
.IP \(bu 4
Reads where PAIRED and READ2 are set, and READ1 is not set are \*(lqlast\*(rq
fragments.
.IP \(bu 4
Reads where PAIRED is set and either both READ1 and READ2 are set or
neither is set are not counted in either category.
.PP
The CHK row contains distinct CRC32 checksums of read names, sequences
and quality values.  The checksums are computed per alignment record
and summed, meaning the checksum does not change if the input file has
the sort-order changed.

The SN section contains a series of counts, percentages, and averages, in a similar style to
.BR "samtools flagstat" ,
but more comprehensive.

.RS
.B raw total sequences
- total number of reads in a file. Same number reported by
.BR "samtools view -c".

.B filtered sequences
- number of discarded reads when using -f or -F option.

.B sequences
- number of processed reads.

.B is sorted
- flag indicating whether the file is coordinate sorted (1) or not (0).

.B 1st fragments
- number of
.B first
fragment reads (flags 0x01 not set; or flags 0x01
and 0x40 set, 0x80 not set).

.B last fragments
- number of
.B last
fragment reads (flags 0x01 and 0x80 set, 0x40 not set).

.B reads mapped
- number of reads, paired or single, that are mapped (flag 0x4 or 0x8 not set).

.B reads mapped and paired
- number of mapped paired reads (flag 0x1 is set and flags 0x4 and 0x8 are not set).

.B reads unmapped
- number of unmapped reads (flag 0x4 is set).

.B reads properly paired
- number of mapped paired reads with flag 0x2 set.

.B paired
- number of paired reads, mapped or unmapped, that are neither secondary nor supplementary (flag 0x1 is set and flags 0x100 (256) and 0x800 (2048) are not set).

.B reads duplicated
- number of duplicate reads (flag 0x400 (1024) is set).

.B reads MQ0
- number of mapped reads with mapping quality 0.

.B reads QC failed
- number of reads that failed the quality checks (flag 0x200 (512) is set).

.B non-primary alignments
- number of secondary reads (flag 0x100 (256) set).

.B total length
- number of processed bases from reads that are neither secondary nor supplementary (flags 0x100 (256) and 0x800 (2048) are not set).

.B total first fragment length
- number of processed bases that belong to
.BR "first " fragments.

.B total last fragment length
- number of processed bases that belong to
.BR "last " fragments.

.B bases mapped
- number of processed bases that belong to
.B reads mapped.

.B bases mapped (cigar)
- number of mapped bases filtered by the CIGAR string corresponding to the read they belong to. Only alignment matches(M), inserts(I), sequence matches(=) and sequence mismatches(X) are counted.

.B bases trimmed
- number of bases trimmed by bwa, that belong to non secondary and non supplementary reads. Enabled by -q option.

.B bases duplicated
- number of bases that belong to
.B reads duplicated.

.B mismatches
- number of mismatched bases, as reported by the NM tag associated wit a read, if present.

.B error rate
- ratio between
.B mismatches
and
.B bases mapped (cigar).

.B average length
- ratio between
.B total length
and
.B sequences.

.B average first fragment length
- ratio between
.B total first fragment length
and
.B 1st fragments.

.B average last fragment length
- ratio between
.B total last fragment length
and
.B last fragments.

.B maximum length
- length of the longest read (includes hard-clipped bases).

.B maximum first fragment length
- length of the longest
.B first
fragment read (includes hard-clipped bases).

.B maximum last fragment length
- length of the longest
.B last
fragment read (includes hard-clipped bases).

.B average quality
- ratio between the sum of base qualities and
.B total length.

.B insert size average
- the average absolute template length for paired and mapped reads.

.B insert size standard deviation
- standard deviation for the average template length distribution.

.B inward oriented pairs
- number of paired reads with flag 0x40 (64) set and flag 0x10 (16) not set or with flag 0x80 (128) set and flag 0x10 (16) set.

.B outward oriented pairs
- number of paired reads with flag 0x40 (64) set and flag 0x10 (16) set or with flag 0x80 (128) set and flag 0x10 (16) not set.

.B pairs with other orientation
- number of paired reads that don't fall in any of the above two categories.

.B pairs on different chromosomes
- number of pairs where one read is on one chromosome and the pair read is on a different chromosome.

.B percentage of properly paired reads
- percentage of
.B reads properly paired
out of
.B sequences.

.B bases inside the target
- number of bases inside the target region(s) (when a target file is specified with -t option).

.B percentage of target genome with coverage > VAL
- percentage of target bases with a coverage larger than VAL. By default, VAL is 0, but a custom value can be supplied by the user with -g option.
.RE


The FFQ and LFQ sections report the quality distribution per
first/last fragment and per cycle number.  They have one row per cycle
(reported as the first column after the FFQ/LFQ key) with remaining
columns being the observed integer counts per quality value, starting
at quality 0 in the left-most row and ending at the largest observed
quality.  Thus each row forms its own quality distribution and any
cycle specific quality artefacts can be observed.

GCF and GCL report the total GC content of each fragment, separated
into first and last fragments.  The columns show the GC percentile
(between 0 and 100) and an integer count of fragments at that
percentile.

GCC, FBC and LBC report the nucleotide content per cycle either combined
(GCC) or split into first (FBC) and last (LBC) fragments.  The columns
are cycle number (integer), and percentage counts for A, C, G, T, N
and other (typically containing ambiguity codes) normalised against
the total counts of A, C, G and T only (excluding N and other).

FTC and LTC report the total numbers of nucleotides for first and last
fragments, respectively. The columns are the raw counters for A, C, G,
T and N bases.

BCC, CRC, OXC and RXC are the barcode equivalent of GCC, showing
nucleotide content for the barcode tags BC, CR, OX and RX respectively.
Their quality values distributions are in the QTQ, CYQ, BZQ and
QXQ sections, corresponding to the BC/QT, CR/CY, OX/BZ and RX/QX SAM
format sequence/quality tags.  These quality value distributions
follow the same format used in the FFQ and LFQ sections. All these
section names are followed by a number (1 or 2), indicating that the
stats figures below them correspond to the first or second barcode (in
the case of dual indexing). Thus, these sections will appear as BCC1,
CRC1, OXC1 and RXC1, accompanied by their quality correspondents QTQ1,
CYQ1, BZQ1 and QXQ1. If a separator is present in the barcode sequence
(usually a hyphen), indicating dual indexing, then sections ending in
"2" will also be reported to show the second tag statistics (e.g. both
BCC1 and BCC2 are present).

IS reports insert size distributions with one row per size, reported
in the first column, with subsequent columns for the frequency of
total pairs, inward oriented pairs, outward orient pairs and other
orientation pairs.  The \fB-i\fR option specifies the maximum insert
size reported.

RL reports the distribution for all read lengths, with one row per
observed length (up to the maximum specified by the \fB-l\fR option).
Columns are read length and frequency.  FRL and LRL contains the same
information separated into first and last fragments.

ID reports the distribution of indel sizes, with one row per observed
size. The columns are size, frequency of insertions at that size and
frequency of deletions at that size.

IC reports the frequency of indels occurring per cycle, broken down by
both insertion / deletion and by first / last read.  Note for
multi-base indels this only counts the first base location.  Columns
are cycle, number of insertions in first fragments, number of
insertions in last fragments, number of deletions in first fragments,
and number of deletions in last fragments.

COV reports a distribution of the alignment depth per covered
reference site.  For example an average depth of 50 would ideally
result in a normal distribution centred on 50, but the presence of
repeats or copy-number variation may reveal multiple peaks at
approximate multiples of 50.  The first column is an inclusive
coverage range in the form of \fB[\fImin\fB-\fImax\fB]\fR.  The next
columns are a repeat of the \fImax\fRimum portion of the depth range
(now as a single integer) and the frequency that depth range was
observed.  The minimum, maximum and range step size are controlled by
the \fB-c\fR option.  Depths above and below the minimum and maximum
are reported with ranges \fB[<\fImin\fB]\fR and \fB[\fImax\fB<]\fR.

GCD reports the GC content of the reference data aligned against per
alignment record, with one row per observed GC percentage reported as
the first column and sorted on this column.  The second column is a
total sequence percentile, as a running total (ending at 100%).  The
first and second columns may be used to produce a simple distribution
of GC content.  Subsequent columns list the coverage depth at 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th and 90th GC percentiles for this specific GC
percentage, revealing any GC bias in mapping.  These columns are
averaged depths, so are floating point with no maximum value.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.BI "-c, --coverage " MIN , MAX , STEP
Set coverage distribution to the specified range (MIN, MAX, STEP all given as integers)
[1,1000,1]
.TP
.B -d, --remove-dups
Exclude from statistics reads marked as duplicates
.TP
.BI "-f, --required-flag "  STR "|" INT
Required flag, 0 for unset. See also `samtools flags`
[0]
.TP
.BI "-F, --filtering-flag " STR "|" INT
Filtering flag, 0 for unset. See also `samtools flags`
[0]
.TP
.BI "--GC-depth " FLOAT
the size of GC-depth bins (decreasing bin size increases memory requirement)
[2e4]
.TP
.B -h, --help
This help message
.TP
.BI "-i, --insert-size " INT
Maximum insert size
[8000]
.TP
.BI "-I, --id " STR
Include only listed read group or sample name
[]
.TP
.BI "-l, --read-length " INT
Include in the statistics only reads with the given read length
[-1]
.TP
.BI "-m, --most-inserts " FLOAT
Report only the main part of inserts
[0.99]
.TP
.BI "-P, --split-prefix " STR
A path or string prefix to prepend to filenames output when creating
categorised statistics files with
.BR -S / --split .
[input filename]
.TP
.BI "-q, --trim-quality " INT
The BWA trimming parameter
[0]
.TP
.BI "-r, --ref-seq " FILE
Reference sequence (required for GC-depth and mismatches-per-cycle calculation).
[]
.TP
.BI "-S, --split " TAG
In addition to the complete statistics, also output categorised statistics
based on the tagged field
.I TAG
(e.g., use
.B --split RG
to split into read groups).

Categorised statistics are written to files named
.RI < prefix >_< value >.bamstat,
where
.I prefix
is as given by
.B --split-prefix
(or the input filename by default) and
.I value
has been encountered as the specified tagged field's value in one or more
alignment records.
.TP
.BI "-t, --target-regions " FILE
Do stats in these regions only. Tab-delimited file chr,from,to, 1-based, inclusive.
[]
.TP
.B "-x, --sparse"
Suppress outputting IS rows where there are no insertions.
.TP
.B "-p, --remove-overlaps"
Remove overlaps of paired-end reads from coverage and base count computations.
.TP
.BI "-g, --cov-threshold " INT
Only bases with coverage above this value will be included in the target percentage computation [0]
.TP
.B "-X"
If this option is set, it will allows user to specify customized index file location(s) if the data
folder does not contain any index file.
Example usage: samtools stats [options] -X /data_folder/data.bam /index_folder/data.bai chrM:1-10

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Petr Danacek with major modifications by Nicholas Clarke,
Martin Pollard, Nicholas Clarke, Josh Randall and Valeriu Ohan, all
from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-flagstat (1),
.IR samtools-idxstats (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
