'\" t
.TH samtools-fixmate 1 "6 December 2019" "samtools-1.10" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools fixmate \- fills in mate coordinates and insert size fields.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2018 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools fixmate
.RB [ -rpcm ]
.RB [ -O
.IR format ]
.I in.nameSrt.bam out.bam

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Fill in mate coordinates, ISIZE and mate related flags from a
name-sorted alignment.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 11
.B -r
Remove secondary and unmapped reads.
.TP
.B -p
Disable FR proper pair check.
.TP
.B -c
Add template cigar ct tag.
.TP
.B -m
Add ms (mate score) tags.  These are used by
.B markdup
to select the best reads to keep.
.TP
.BI "-O " FORMAT
Write the final output as
.BR sam ", " bam ", or " cram .

By default, samtools tries to select a format based on the output
filename extension; if output is to standard output or no format can be
deduced,
.B bam
is selected.
.TP
.BI --no-PG
Do not add a @PG line to the header of the output file.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Heng Li from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-markdup (1),
.IR samtools-sort (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
