'\" t
.TH samtools-targetcut 1 "6 December 2019" "samtools-1.10" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools targetcut \- cut fosmid regions (for fosmid pool only)
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2018 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools targetcut
.RB [ -Q
.IR minBaseQ ]
.RB [ -i
.IR inPenalty ]
.RB [ -0
.IR em0 ]
.RB [ -1
.IR em1 ]
.RB [ -2
.IR em2 ]
.RB [ -f
.IR ref "] " in.bam

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This command identifies target regions by examining the continuity of read depth, computes
haploid consensus sequences of targets and outputs a SAM with each sequence corresponding
to a target. When option
.B -f
is in use, BAQ will be applied. This command is
.B only
designed for cutting fosmid clones from fosmid pool sequencing [Ref. Kitzman et al. (2010)].

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.BI -Q \ minBaseQ
Ignore bases with quality less than \fIminBaseQ\fR.

.TP
.BI -i \ inPenalty
Penalty for in state transition.
.TP
.BI -0 \ em0
Emission score 0.
.TP
.BI -1 \ em1
Emission score 1.
.TP
.BI -2 \ em2
Emission score 2.
.TP
.BI -f\  ref
Reference FASTA file.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Heng Li from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
