'\" t
.TH samtools-rmdup 1 "6 December 2019" "samtools-1.10" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools rmdup \- removes duplicate reads (obsolete)
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2018 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools rmdup
.RB [ -sS ]
.I input.srt.bam out.bam

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B This command is obsolete.  Use markdup instead.

Remove potential PCR duplicates: if multiple read pairs have identical
external coordinates, only retain the pair with highest mapping quality.
In the paired-end mode, this command
.B ONLY
works with FR orientation and requires ISIZE is correctly set. It does
not work for unpaired reads (e.g. two ends mapped to different
chromosomes or orphan reads).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -s
Remove duplicates for single-end reads. By default, the command works for
paired-end reads only.
.TP 8
.B -S
Treat paired-end reads and single-end reads.

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP o 2
Samtools paired-end rmdup does not work for unpaired reads (e.g. orphan
reads or ends mapped to different chromosomes). If this is a concern,
please use Picard's MarkDuplicates which correctly handles these cases,
although a little slower.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Heng Li from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
