'\" t
.TH samtools-coverage 1 "2 September 2022" "samtools-1.16.1" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools coverage \- produces a histogram or table of coverage per chromosome
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2019, 2021 Genome Research Ltd.
.\"
.\" Author: James Bonfield <jkb@sanger.ac.uk>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools coverage
.RI [ options ]
.RI "[" in1.sam | in1.bam | in1.cram " [" in2.sam | in2.bam | in2.cram "] [...]]"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Computes the depth at each position or region and draws an ASCII-art
histogram or tabulated text.

The tabulated form uses the following headings.

.TS
lb l .
rname	Reference name / chromosome
startpos	Start position
endpos	End position (or sequence length)
numreads	Number reads aligned to the region (after filtering)
covbases	Number of covered bases with depth >= 1
coverage	Percentage of covered bases [0..100]
meandepth	Mean depth of coverage
meanbaseq	Mean baseQ in covered region
meanmapq	Mean mapQ of selected reads
.TE

.SH OPTIONS

Input options:

.TP 8
.BI -b,\ --bam-list \ FILE
List of input BAM files, one file per line [null]
.TP
.BI -l,\ --min-read-len \ INT
Ignore reads shorter than \fIINT\fR base pairs [0]
.TP
.BI -q,\ --min-MQ \ INT
Minimum mapping quality for an alignment to be used [0]
.TP
.BI -Q,\ --min-BQ \ INT
Minimum base quality for a base to be considered [0]
.TP
.BI --rf,\ --incl-flags \ STR|INT
Required flags: skip reads with mask bits unset [null]
.TP
.BI --ff,\ --excl-flags \ STR|INT
Filter flags: skip reads with mask bits set
[UNMAP,SECONDARY,QCFAIL,DUP]
.TP
.BI -d,\ --depth \ INT
Maximum allowed coverage depth [1000000]. If 0, depth is set to the maximum
integer value effectively removing any depth limit.

.PP
Output options:

.TP 8
.BI -m,\ --histogram
Show histogram instead of tabular output.
.TP
.BI -A,\ --ascii
Show only ASCII characters in histogram using colon and fullstop for
full and half height characters.
.TP
.BI -o,\ --output \ FILE
Write output to FILE [stdout].
.TP
.BI -H,\ --no-header
Don't print a header in tabular mode.
.TP
.BI -w,\ --n-bins \ INT
Number of bins in histogram.  [terminal width - 40]
.TP
.BI -r,\ --region \ REG
Show specified region. Format: chr:start-end. 
.TP
.BI -h,\ --help
Shows command help.

.SH EXAMPLES

Running coverage in tabular mode, on a specific region, with tabs
shown as spaces for clarity in this man page.

.EX 2
samtools coverage -r chr1:1M-12M input.bam

#rname  startpos  endpos    numreads  covbases  coverage  meandepth  meanbaseq  meanmapq
chr1    1000000   12000000  528695    1069995   9.72723   3.50281    34.4       55.8
.EE

An example of the histogram output is below, with ASCII block
characters replaced by "#" for rendering in this man page.

.EX 2
samtools coverage -A -w 32 -r chr1:1M-12M input.bam

chr1 (249.25Mbp)
>  24.19% | .                              | Number of reads: 528695
>  21.50% |::                              |     (132000 filtered)
>  18.81% |::                              | Covered bases:   1.07Mbp
>  16.12% |::                           :  | Percent covered: 9.727%
>  13.44% |::  :  .       ::            : :| Mean coverage:   3.5x
>  10.75% |:: ::  :       ::          : : :| Mean baseQ:      34.4
>   8.06% |:::::  :       ::        : : : :| Mean mapQ:       55.8
>   5.37% |::::: ::      :::      : ::::: :| 
>   2.69% |::::: :::     :::  ::: :::::::::| Histo bin width: 343.8Kbp
>   0.00% |:::::::::::. :::::::::::::::::::| Histo max bin:   26.873%
        1.00M     4.44M     7.87M       12.00M 
.EE


.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Florian P Breitwieser.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-depth (1),
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
