'\" t
.TH samtools-flagstat 1 "6 December 2019" "samtools-1.10" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools flagstat \- counts the number of alignments for each FLAG type
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2019 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools flagstat
.IR in.sam | in.bam | in.cram

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Does a full pass through the input file to calculate and print statistics
to stdout.

Provides counts for each of 13 categories based primarily on bit flags in
the FLAG field.
Each category in the output is broken down into QC pass and QC fail.
In the default output format, these are presented as "#PASS + #FAIL" followed
by a description of the category.

The first row of output gives the total number of reads that are QC pass and
fail (according to flag bit 0x200). For example:

  122 + 28 in total (QC-passed reads + QC-failed reads)

Which would indicate that there are a total of 150 reads in the input file,
122 of which are marked as QC pass and 28 of which are marked as "not passing
quality controls"

Following this, additional categories are given for reads which are:

.RS 18
.TP
secondary
0x100 bit set
.TP
supplementary
0x800 bit set
.TP
duplicates
0x400 bit set
.TP
mapped
0x4 bit not set
.TP
paired in sequencing
0x1 bit set
.TP
read1
both 0x1 and 0x40 bits set
.TP
read2
both 0x1 and 0x80 bits set
.TP
properly paired
both 0x1 and 0x2 bits set and 0x4 bit not set
.TP
with itself and mate mapped
0x1 bit set and neither 0x4 nor 0x8 bits set
.TP
singletons
both 0x1 and 0x8 bits set and bit 0x4 not set
.RE

.RS 10
And finally, two rows are given that additionally filter on the reference
name (RNAME), mate reference name (MRNM), and mapping quality (MAPQ) fields:
.RE

.RS 18
.TP
with mate mapped to a different chr
0x1 bit set and neither 0x4 nor 0x8 bits set and MRNM not equal to RNAME
.TP
with mate mapped to a different chr (mapQ>=5)
0x1 bit set and neither 0x4 nor 0x8 bits set
and MRNM not equal to RNAME and MAPQ >= 5
.RE

.SH ALTERNATIVE OUTPUT FORMATS
.PP
The
.B -O
option can be used to select two alternative formats for the output.
.PP
Using
.B -O tsv
selects a tab-separated values format that can easily be imported into
spreadsheet software.
In this format the first column contains the values for QC-passed reads,
the second column has the values for QC-failed reads and the third
contains the category names.
.PP
Using
.B -O json
generates an ECMA-404 JSON data interchange format object
<https://www.json.org/>.
The top-level object contains two named objects
.BR "QC-passed reads" " and " "QC-failed reads" .
These contain the various categories listed above as names and
the corresponding count as value.

For the default format, the
.BR mapped ", " "properly paired" ", and " singletons
show the count as a percentage of the total number of QC-passed or QC-failed
reads after the category name.
For example:
.EX
32 + 0 mapped (94.12% : N/A)
.EE

In the
.BR tsv " and " json
formats, these percentages are listed in separate categories
.BR "mapped %" ", " "properly paired %" ", and " "singletons %" .
If the percentage cannot be calculated (because the total is zero)
then in the
.BR default " and " tsv
formats it will be reported as `N/A'.
In the
.B json
format, it will be reported as a JSON `null' value.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 10
.BI "-@ " INT
Set number of additional threads to use when reading the file.
.TP
.BI "-O " FORMAT
Set the output format.
.I FORMAT
can be set to `default', `json' or `tsv' to select the default, JSON
or tab-separated values output format.
If this option is not used, the default format will be selected.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Heng Li from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-idxstats (1),
.IR samtools-stats (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
