'\" t
.TH samtools-sort 1 "6 December 2019" "samtools-1.10" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools sort \- sorts SAM/BAM/CRAM files
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2018 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
samtools sort
.RB [ -l
.IR level ]
.RB [ -m
.IR maxMem ]
.RB [ -o
.IR out.bam ]
.RB [ -O
.IR format ]
.RB [ -n ]
.RB [ -t
.IR tag ]
.RB [ -T
.IR tmpprefix ]
.RB [ -@
.IR threads "] [" in.sam | in.bam | in.cram ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Sort alignments by leftmost coordinates, or by read name when
.B -n
is used.
An appropriate
.B @HD-SO
sort order header tag will be added or an existing one updated if necessary.

The sorted output is written to standard output by default, or to the
specified file
.RI ( out.bam )
when
.B -o
is used.
This command will also create temporary files
.IB tmpprefix . %d .bam
as needed when the entire alignment data cannot fit into memory
(as controlled via the
.B -m
option).

Consider using
.B samtools collate
instead if you need name collated data without a full lexicographical sort.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP 11
.BI "-l " INT
Set the desired compression level for the final output file, ranging from 0
(uncompressed) or 1 (fastest but minimal compression) to 9 (best compression
but slowest to write), similarly to
.BR gzip (1)'s
compression level setting.
.IP
If
.B -l
is not used, the default compression level will apply.
.TP
.BI "-m " INT
Approximately the maximum required memory per thread, specified either in bytes
or with a
.BR K ", " M ", or " G
suffix.
[768 MiB]
.IP
To prevent sort from creating a huge number of temporary files, it enforces a
minimum value of 1M for this setting.
.TP
.B -n
Sort by read names (i.e., the
.B QNAME
field) rather than by chromosomal coordinates.
.TP
.BI "-t " TAG
Sort first by the value in the alignment tag TAG, then by position or name (if
also using \fB-n\fP).
.TP
.BI "-o " FILE
Write the final sorted output to
.IR FILE ,
rather than to standard output.
.TP
.BI "-O " FORMAT
Write the final output as
.BR sam ", " bam ", or " cram .

By default, samtools tries to select a format based on the
.B -o
filename extension; if output is to standard output or no format can be
deduced,
.B bam
is selected.
.TP
.BI "-T " PREFIX
Write temporary files to
.IB PREFIX . nnnn .bam,
or if the specified
.I PREFIX
is an existing directory, to
.IB PREFIX /samtools. mmm . mmm .tmp. nnnn .bam,
where
.I mmm
is unique to this invocation of the
.B sort
command.
.IP
By default, any temporary files are written alongside the output file, as
.IB out.bam .tmp. nnnn .bam,
or if output is to standard output, in the current directory as
.BI samtools. mmm . mmm .tmp. nnnn .bam.
.TP
.BI "-@ " INT
Set number of sorting and compression threads.
By default, operation is single-threaded.
.TP
.BI --no-PG
Do not add a @PG line to the header of the output file.
.PP
.B Ordering Rules

The following rules are used for ordering records.

If option \fB-t\fP is in use, records are first sorted by the value of
the given alignment tag, and then by position or name (if using \fB-n\fP).
For example, \*(lq-t RG\*(rq will make read group the primary sort key.  The
rules for ordering by tag are:

.IP \(bu 4
Records that do not have the tag are sorted before ones that do.
.IP \(bu 4
If the types of the tags are different, they will be sorted so
that single character tags (type A) come before array tags (type B), then
string tags (types H and Z), then numeric tags (types f and i).
.IP \(bu 4
Numeric tags (types f and i) are compared by value.  Note that comparisons
of floating-point values are subject to issues of rounding and precision.
.IP \(bu 4
String tags (types H and Z) are compared based on the binary
contents of the tag using the C
.BR strcmp (3)
function.
.IP \(bu 4
Character tags (type A) are compared by binary character value.
.IP \(bu 4
No attempt is made to compare tags of other types \(em notably type B
array values will not be compared.
.PP
When the \fB-n\fP option is present, records are sorted by name.  Names are
compared so as to give a \*(lqnatural\*(rq ordering \(em i.e. sections
consisting of digits are compared numerically while all other sections are
compared based on their binary representation.  This means \*(lqa1\*(rq will
come before \*(lqb1\*(rq and \*(lqa9\*(rq will come before \*(lqa10\*(rq.
Records with the same name will be ordered according to the values of
the READ1 and READ2 flags (see
.BR flags ).

When the \fB-n\fP option is
.B not
present, reads are sorted by reference (according to the order of the @SQ
header records), then by position in the reference, and then by the REVERSE
flag.

.B Note

.PP
Historically
.B samtools sort
also accepted a less flexible way of specifying the final and
temporary output filenames:
.IP
samtools sort
.RB [ -f "] [" -o ]
.I in.bam out.prefix
.PP
This has now been removed.
The previous \fIout.prefix\fP argument (and \fB-f\fP option, if any)
should be changed to an appropriate combination of \fB-T\fP \fIPREFIX\fP
and \fB-o\fP \fIFILE\fP.  The previous \fB-o\fP option should be removed,
as output defaults to standard output.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Heng Li from the Sanger Institute with numerous subsequent
modifications.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-collate (1),
.IR samtools-merge (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
