'\" t
.TH samtools-reference 1 "15 April 2024" "samtools-1.20" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools reference \- extracts an embedded reference from a CRAM file
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2022 Genome Research Ltd.
.\"
.\" Author: James Bonfield
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
samtools reference
.RB [ -q ]
.RB [ -r
.IR region ]
.RB [ -o
.IR out.fa "] " in.cram

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Creates the reference from aligned data using either the MD:Z
auxiliary tags or an embedded reference in a CRAM file.  The output
is a FASTA file.

For the embedded reference mode (\fB-e\fR) this operation is fast, but
only works on CRAMs produced using \fB--output-fmt-option embed_ref=1\fR.
Note this may not be the complete reference used.  Each CRAM slice
will hold the entire reference that spans the slice coordinates, but
gaps in coverage can lead to gaps between slices.  However this
reference should be suitable for passing into a CRAM decode
(\fBsamtools view -T ref.fa\fR).

For SAM/BAM files or CRAMs without reference, using the MD:Z tag may
also produce an incomplete reference.  Unlike embedded reference, this
reference may not be sufficient for decoding a CRAM file as the CRAM
slice headers store the MD5sum of the portion of reference than spans
that slice, but the slice may not have 100% coverage leading to Ns in
the computed reference.  However it should still be possible to decode
such CRAMs by ignoring the md5 mismatches using e.g. \fBsamtools view
--input-fmt-option ignore_md5=1\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B -e
Enable CRAM embedded reference mode.

.TP 8
.B -q
Enables quiet mode and will produce no output.  By default a line per
reference is reporting describing the percentage with non-N bases.

.TP 8
.BI "-r " region
Specifies a single region to produce the reference from.  If
specified, an index file must be present.

.TP 8
.BI "-o " FILE
Write the FASTA records to \fIFILE\fR.  By default this is sent to stdout.

.TP 8
.BI "-@ " INT
The number of BAM/CRAM decompression threads to use in addition to the
main thread [0].

Note this does not multi-thread the main reference generation steps,
so scaling may be capped by 2 or 3 threads, depending on the data.  It
will also not affect the \fB-e\fR option for CRAM embedded reference,
although this is already the fastest method.

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by James Bonfield from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
