'\" t
.TH samtools-view 1 "15 April 2024" "samtools-1.20" "Bioinformatics tools"
.SH NAME
samtools view \- views and converts SAM/BAM/CRAM files
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008-2011, 2013-2022 Genome Research Ltd.
.\" Portions copyright (C) 2010, 2011 Broad Institute.
.\"
.\" Author: Heng Li <lh3@sanger.ac.uk>
.\" Author: Joshua C. Randall <jcrandall@alum.mit.edu>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"),
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
.\" Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
.\" DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.
.\" For code blocks and examples (cf groff's Ultrix-specific man macros)
.de EX

.  in +\\$1
.  nf
.  ft CR
..
.de EE
.  ft
.  fi
.  in

..
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.B samtools view
.RI [ options ]
.IR in.sam | in.bam | in.cram
.RI [ region ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
With no options or regions specified, prints all alignments in the specified
input alignment file (in SAM, BAM, or CRAM format) to standard output
in SAM format (with no header).

You may specify one or more space-separated region specifications after the
input filename to restrict output to only those alignments which overlap the
specified region(s). Use of region specifications requires a coordinate-sorted
and indexed input file (in BAM or CRAM format).

The
.BR -b ,
.BR -C ,
.BR -1 ,
.BR -u ,
.BR -h ,
.BR -H ,
and
.B -c
options change the output format from the default of headerless SAM, and the
.B -o
and
.B -U
options set the output file name(s).

The
.B -t
and
.B -T
options provide additional reference data. One of these two options is required
when SAM input does not contain @SQ headers, and the
.B -T
option is required whenever writing CRAM output.

The
.BR -L ,
.BR -M ,
.BR -N ,
.BR -r ,
.BR -R ,
.BR -d ,
.BR -D ,
.BR -s ,
.BR -q ,
.BR -l ,
.BR -m ,
.BR -f ,
.BR -F ,
.BR -G ,
and
.B --rf
options filter the alignments that will be included in the output to only those
alignments that match certain criteria.

The
.BR -p ,
option sets the UNMAP flag on filtered alignments then writes them to the output
file.

The
.BR -x ,
.BR -B ,
.BR --add-flags ,
and
.B --remove-flags
options modify the data which is contained in each alignment.

The
.B -X
option can be used to allow user to specify customized index file location(s) if the data
folder does not contain any index file. See
.B EXAMPLES
section for sample of usage.

Finally, the
.B -@
option can be used to allocate additional threads to be used for compression, and the
.B -?
option requests a long help message.

.TP
.B REGIONS:
.RS
Regions can be specified as: RNAME[:STARTPOS[-ENDPOS]] and all position
coordinates are 1-based.

Important note: when multiple regions are given, some alignments may be output
multiple times if they overlap more than one of the specified regions.

Examples of region specifications:
.TP 10
.B chr1
Output all alignments mapped to the reference sequence named `chr1' (i.e. @SQ SN:chr1).
.TP
.B chr2:1000000
The region on chr2 beginning at base position 1,000,000 and ending at the
end of the chromosome.
.TP
.B chr3:1000-2000
The 1001bp region on chr3 beginning at base position 1,000 and ending at base
position 2,000 (including both end positions).
.TP
.B '*'
Output the unmapped reads at the end of the file.
(This does not include any unmapped reads placed on a reference sequence
alongside their mapped mates.)
.TP
.B .
Output all alignments.
(Mostly unnecessary as not specifying a region at all has the same effect.)
.RE


.SH OPTIONS
.TP 10
.BR -b ", " --bam
Output in the BAM format.
.TP
.BR -C ", " --cram
Output in the CRAM format (requires -T).
.TP
.BR -1 ", " --fast
Enable fast compression.  This also changes the default output format to
BAM, but this can be overridden by the explicit format options or
using a filename with a known suffix.
.TP
.BR -u ", " --uncompressed
Output uncompressed data. This also changes the default output format to
BAM, but this can be overridden by the explicit format options or
using a filename with a known suffix.

This option saves time spent on compression/decompression and is thus
preferred when the output is piped to another samtools command.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --with-header
Include the header in the output.
.TP
.BR -H ", " --header-only
Output the header only.
.TP
.B --no-header
When producing SAM format, output alignment records but not headers.
This is the default; the option can be used to reset the effect of
.BR -h / -H .
.TP
.BR -c ", " --count
Instead of printing the alignments, only count them and print the
total number. All filter options, such as
.BR -f ,
.BR -F ,
and
.BR -q ,
are taken into account.
.RB "The " -p " option is ignored in this mode."
.TP
.BR -? ", " --help
Output long help and exit immediately.
.TP
.BI "-o " FILE ", --output " FILE
Output to
.I FILE [stdout].
.TP
.BI "-U " FILE ", --unoutput " FILE ", --output-unselected " FILE
Write alignments that are
.I not
selected by the various filter options to
.IR FILE .
When this option is used, all alignments (or all alignments intersecting the
.I regions
specified) are written to either the output file or this file, but never both.
.TP
.BR -p ", " --unmap
Set the UNMAP flag on alignments that are not selected by the filter options.
These alignments are then written to the normal output.  This is not compatible
with
.BR -U .
.TP
.BI "-t " FILE ", --fai-reference " FILE
A tab-delimited
.IR FILE .
Each line must contain the reference name in the first column and the length of
the reference in the second column, with one line for each distinct reference.
Any additional fields beyond the second column are ignored. This file also
defines the order of the reference sequences in sorting. If you run:
`samtools faidx <ref.fa>', the resulting index file
.I <ref.fa>.fai
can be used as this
.IR FILE .
.TP
.BI "-T " FILE ", --reference " FILE
A FASTA format reference
.IR FILE ,
optionally compressed by
.B bgzip
and ideally indexed by
.B samtools
.BR faidx .
If an index is not present one will be generated for you, if the reference
file is local.

If the reference file is not local,
but is accessed instead via an https://, s3:// or other URL,
the index file will need to be supplied by the server alongside the reference.
It is possible to have the reference and index files in different locations
by supplying both to this option separated by the string "##idx##",
for example:

.B -T ftp://x.com/ref.fa##idx##ftp://y.com/index.fa.fai

However, note that only the location of the reference will be stored
in the output file header.
If this method is used to make CRAM files, the cram reader may not be able to
find the index, and may not be able to decode the file unless it can get
the references it needs using a different method.
.TP
.BI "-L " FILE ", --target-file " FILE ", --targets-file " FILE
Only output alignments overlapping the input BED
.I FILE
[null].
.TP
.BR -M ", " --use-index
Use the multi-region iterator on the union of a BED file and
command-line region arguments.  This avoids re-reading the same regions
of files so can sometimes be much faster.  Note this also removes
duplicate sequences.  Without this a sequence that overlaps multiple
regions specified on the command line will be reported multiple times.
The usage of a BED file is optional and its path has to be preceded by
.BR -L
option.
.TP
.BI "--region-file " FILE ", --regions-file " FILE
Use an index and multi-region iterator to only output alignments
overlapping the input BED
.IR FILE .
Equivalent to
.BI "-M -L " FILE
or
.B --use-index --target-file
.IR FILE .
.TP
.BI "-N " FILE ", --qname-file " FILE
Output only alignments with read names listed in
.IR FILE .
If \fIFILE\fR starts with \fB^\fR then the operation is negated and
only outputs alignment with read groups not listed in \fIFILE\fR.
It is not permissible to mix both the filter-in and filter-out style
syntax in the same command.
.TP
.BI "-r " STR ", --read-group " STR
Output alignments in read group
.I STR
[null].
Note that records with no
.B RG
tag will also be output when using this option.
This behaviour may change in a future release.
.TP
.BI "-R " FILE ", --read-group-file " FILE
Output alignments in read groups listed in
.I FILE
[null].
If \fIFILE\fR starts with \fB^\fR then the operation is negated and
only outputs alignment with read names not listed in \fIFILE\fR.
It is not permissible to mix both the filter-in and filter-out style
syntax in the same command.
Note that records with no
.B RG
tag will also be output when using this option.
This behaviour may change in a future release.
.TP
.BI "-d " STR1[:STR2] ", --tag " STR1[:STR2]
Only output alignments with tag
.I STR1
and associated value
.IR STR2 ,
which can be a string or an integer [null].
The value can be omitted, in which case only the tag is considered.

Note that this option does not specify a tag type.
For example, use
.B -d XX:42
to select alignments with an
.B XX:i:42
field, not
.BR "-d XX:i:42" .
.TP
.BI "-D " STR:FILE ", --tag-file " STR:FILE
Only output alignments with tag
.I STR
and associated values listed in
.I FILE
[null].
.TP
.BI "-q " INT ", --min-MQ " INT
Skip alignments with MAPQ smaller than
.I INT
[0].
.TP
.BI "-l " STR ", --library " STR
Only output alignments in library
.I STR
[null].
.TP
.BI "-m " INT ", --min-qlen " INT
Only output alignments with number of CIGAR bases consuming query
sequence \(>=
.I INT
[0]
.TP
.BI "-e " STR ", --expr " STR
Only include alignments that match the filter expression \fISTR\fR.
The syntax for these expressions is described in the main samtools(1) man page
under the FILTER EXPRESSIONS heading.
.TP
.BI "-f " FLAG ", --require-flags " FLAG
Only output alignments with all bits set in
.I FLAG
present in the FLAG field.
.I FLAG
can be specified in hex by beginning with `0x' (i.e. /^0x[0-9A-F]+/),
in octal by beginning with `0' (i.e. /^0[0-7]+/), as a decimal number
not beginning with '0' or as a comma-separated list of flag names.


For a list of flag names see
.IR samtools-flags (1).
.TP
.BI "-F " FLAG ", --excl-flags " FLAG ", --exclude-flags " FLAG
Do not output alignments with any bits set in
.I FLAG
present in the FLAG field.
.I FLAG
can be specified in hex by beginning with `0x' (i.e. /^0x[0-9A-F]+/),
in octal by beginning with `0' (i.e. /^0[0-7]+/), as a decimal number
not beginning with '0' or as a comma-separated list of flag names.
.TP
.BI "--rf " FLAG " , --incl-flags " FLAG ", --include-flags " FLAG
Only output alignments with any bit set in
.I FLAG
present in the FLAG field.
.I FLAG
can be specified in hex by beginning with `0x' (i.e. /^0x[0-9A-F]+/),
in octal by beginning with `0' (i.e. /^0[0-7]+/), as a decimal number
not beginning with '0' or as a comma-separated list of flag names.
.TP
.BI "-G " FLAG
Do not output alignments with all bits set in
.I INT
present in the FLAG field.  This is the opposite of \fI-f\fR such
that \fI-f12 -G12\fR is the same as no filtering at all.
.I FLAG
can be specified in hex by beginning with `0x' (i.e. /^0x[0-9A-F]+/),
in octal by beginning with `0' (i.e. /^0[0-7]+/), as a decimal number
not beginning with '0' or as a comma-separated list of flag names.
.TP
.BI "-x " STR ", --remove-tag " STR
Read tag(s) to exclude from output (repeatable) [null].  This can be a
single tag or a comma separated list.  Alternatively the option itself
can be repeated multiple times.

If the list starts with a `^' then it is negated and treated as a
request to remove all tags except those in \fISTR\fR. The list may be
empty, so \fB-x ^\fR will remove all tags.

Note that tags will only be removed from reads that pass filtering.
.TP
.BI "--keep-tag " STR
This keeps \fIonly\fR tags listed in \fISTR\fR and is directly equivalent
to \fB--remove-tag ^\fR\fISTR\fR.  Specifying an empty list will remove
all tags.  If both \fB--keep-tag\fR and \fB--remove-tag\fR are
specified then \fB--keep-tag\fR has precedence.

Note that tags will only be removed from reads that pass filtering.
.TP
.BR -B ", " --remove-B
Collapse the backward CIGAR operation.
.TP
.BI "--add-flags " FLAG
Adds flag(s) to read.
.I FLAG
can be specified in hex by beginning with `0x' (i.e. /^0x[0-9A-F]+/),
in octal by beginning with `0' (i.e. /^0[0-7]+/), as a decimal number
not beginning with '0' or as a comma-separated list of flag names.
.TP
.BI "--remove-flags " FLAG
Remove flag(s) from read.
.I FLAG
is specified in the same way as with the
.B "--add-flags"
option.
.TP
.BI "--subsample " FLOAT
Output only a proportion of the input alignments, as specified by 0.0 \(<=
.I FLOAT
\(<= 1.0, which gives the fraction of templates/pairs to be kept.
This subsampling acts in the same way on all of the alignment records in
the same template or read pair, so it never keeps a read but not its mate.
.TP
.BI "--subsample-seed " INT
Subsampling seed used to influence
.I which
subset of reads is kept.
.\" Reads are retained based on a score computed by hashing their QNAME
.\" field and the seed value.
When subsampling data that has previously been subsampled, be sure to use
a different seed value from those used previously; otherwise more reads
will be retained than expected.
[0]
.TP
.BI "-s " FLOAT
Subsampling shorthand option:
.BI "-s " INT . FRAC
is equivalent to
.BI "--subsample-seed " INT " --subsample"
.RI 0. FRAC .
.TP
.BI "-@ " INT ", --threads " INT
Number of BAM compression threads to use in addition to main thread [0].
.TP
.BR -P ", " --fetch-pairs
Retrieve pairs even when the mate is outside of the requested region.
Enabling this option also turns on the multi-region iterator (\fB-M\fR).
A region to search must be specified, either on the command-line, or using
the \fB-L\fR option.
The input file must be an indexed regular file.

This option first scans the requested region, using the \fBRNEXT\fR and
\fBPNEXT\fR fields of the records that have the PAIRED flag set and pass
other filtering options to find where paired reads are located.
These locations are used to build an expanded region list, and a set of
\fBQNAME\fRs to allow from the new regions.
It will then make a second pass, collecting all reads from the
originally-specified region list together with reads from additional locations
that match the allowed set of \fBQNAME\fRs.
Any other filtering options used will be applied to all reads found during this
second pass.

As this option links reads using \fBRNEXT\fR and \fBPNEXT\fR,
it is important that these fields are set accurately.
Use 'samtools fixmate' to correct them if necessary.

Note that this option does not work with the \fB-c, --count\fR;
\fB-U, --output-unselected\fR; or \fB-p, --unmap\fR options.
.TP
.B -S
Ignored for compatibility with previous samtools versions.
Previously this option was required if input was in SAM format, but now the
correct format is automatically detected by examining the first few characters
of input.
.TP
.BR -X ", " --customized-index
Include customized index file as a part of arguments. See
.B EXAMPLES
section for sample of usage.
.TP
.BI "-z " FLAGs ", --sanitize " FLAGs
Perform some sanity checks on the state of SAM record fields, fixing
up common mistakes made by aligners.  These include soft-clipping
alignments when they extend beyond the end of the reference, marking
records as unmapped when they have reference * or position 0, and
ensuring unmapped alignments have no CIGAR or mapping quality for
unmapped alignments and no MD, NM, CG or SM tags.

\fIFLAGs\fR is a comma-separated list of keywords chosen from the
following list.

.RS
.TP
unmap
The UNMAPPED BAM flag. This is set for reads with position <= 0,
reference name "*" or reads starting beyond the end of the
reference. Note CIGAR "*" is permitted for mapped data so does not
trigger this.
.TP
pos
Position and reference name fields.  These may be cleared when a
sequence is unmapped due to the coordinates being beyond the end of
the reference.  Selecting this may change the sort order of the file,
so it is not a part of the \fBon\fR compound argument.
.TP
mqual
Mapping quality.  This is set to zero for unmapped reads.
.TP
cigar
Modifies CIGAR fields, either by adding soft-clips for reads that
overlap the end of the reference or by clearing it for unmapped
reads.
.TP
aux
For unmapped data, some auxiliary fields are meaningless and will be
removed.  These include NM, MD, CG and SM.
.TP
off
Perform no sanity fixing.  This is the default
.TP
on
Sanitize data in a way that guarantees the same sort order.  This is
everything except for \fBpos\fR.
.TP
all
All sanitizing options, including \fBpos\fR.
.RE

.TP
.B --no-PG
Do not add a @PG line to the header of the output file.

.SH EXAMPLES
.IP o 2
Import SAM to BAM when
.B @SQ
lines are present in the header:
.EX 2
samtools view -bo aln.bam aln.sam
.EE
If
.B @SQ
lines are absent:
.EX 2
samtools faidx ref.fa
samtools view -bt ref.fa.fai -o aln.bam aln.sam
.EE
where
.I ref.fa.fai
is generated automatically by the
.B faidx
command.

.IP o 2
Convert a BAM file to a CRAM file using a local reference sequence.
.EX 2
samtools view -C -T ref.fa -o aln.cram aln.bam
.EE

.IP o 2
Convert a BAM file to a CRAM with NM and MD tags stored verbatim
rather than calculating on the fly during CRAM decode, so that mixed
data sets with MD/NM only on some records, or NM calculated using
different definitions of mismatch, can be decoded without change.  The
second command demonstrates how to decode such a file.  The request to
not decode MD here is turning off auto-generation of both MD and NM;
it will still emit the MD/NM tags on records that had these stored
verbatim.
.EX 2
samtools view -C --output-fmt-option store_md=1 --output-fmt-option store_nm=1 -o aln.cram aln.bam
samtools view --input-fmt-option decode_md=0 -o aln.new.bam aln.cram
.EE
.IP o 2
An alternative way of achieving the above is listing multiple options
after the \fB--output-fmt\fR or \fB-O\fR option.  The commands below
are equivalent to the two above.
.EX 2
samtools view -O cram,store_md=1,store_nm=1 -o aln.cram aln.bam
samtools view --input-fmt cram,decode_md=0 -o aln.new.bam aln.cram
.EE

.IP o 2
Include customized index file as a part of arguments.
.EX 2
samtools view [options] -X /data_folder/data.bam /index_folder/data.bai chrM:1-10
.EE

.IP o 2
Output alignments in read group \fBgrp2\fR (records with no \fBRG\fR tag will also be in the output).
.EX 2
samtools view -r grp2 -o /data_folder/data.rg2.bam /data_folder/data.bam
.EE

.IP o 2
Only keep reads with tag \fBBC\fR and were the barcode
matches the barcodes listed in the barcode file.
.EX 2
samtools view -D BC:barcodes.txt -o /data_folder/data.barcodes.bam /data_folder/data.bam
.EE

.IP o 2
Only keep reads with tag \fBRG\fR and read group \fBgrp2\fR.
This does almost the same than \fB-r grp2\fR but will not keep records without the \fBRG\fR tag.
.EX 2
samtools view -d RG:grp2 -o /data_folder/data.rg2_only.bam /data_folder/data.bam
.EE

.IP o 2
Remove the actions of samtools markdup.  Clear the duplicate flag and remove the \fBdt\fR tag, keep the header.
.EX 2
samtools view -h --remove-flags DUP -x dt -o /data_folder/dat.no_dup_markings.bam /data_folder/data.bam
.EE

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Written by Heng Li from the Sanger Institute.

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR samtools (1),
.IR samtools-tview (1),
.IR sam (5)
.PP
Samtools website: <http://www.htslib.org/>
